docs(blog-post): add blogpost ibis duckdb geospatial (#7687)
ibis-project/ibis: docs/posts/ibis-duckdb-geospatial/index.qmd

date: 2023-12-07
categories:
    - blog
    - duckdb
    - geospatial
---

Ibis now has support for some DuckDB geospatial functions (check the list [here](https://gist.github.com/ncclementi/fbc5564af709e2d7f8882821e3a8649f)), let's take them for a spin.

This post is inspired in the ["DuckDB: Spatial Relationships"](https://geog-414.gishub.org/book/duckdb/07_spatial_relationships.html) lesson from [Dr. Qiusheng Wu](https://geog-414.gishub.org/book/preface/instructor.html)'s course "Spatial Data Management"
from the Department of Geography & Sustainability at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville.

I'll convert the examples to use the Ibis, and add a little extra at the end.

::: {.callout-note}
You can check Dr. Qiusheng Wu's full Spatial Data Management course material in its  [website](https://geog-414.gishub.org/index.html), and the classes are also on [youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A4TOAdsXsEs&list=PLAxJ4-o7ZoPe9SkgnophygyLjTDBzIEbi),
:::

## Setup and Data

At the moment, the geospatial features for the DuckDB backend are available on the main branch of Ibis, but they'll be included in the next release.

To download the data that will be using in this post,

> ```bash

Reviewer: This won't run bash code.

I think the only way to do that is using the `!` syntax from IPython

---
title: "Ibis Geospatial: Introducing support for DuckDB spatial extension"
author: Naty Clementi
date: 2023-12-07
categories:
    - blog
    - duckdb
    - geospatial
---

Ibis now has support for some DuckDB geospatial functions (check the list [here](https://gist.github.com/ncclementi/fbc5564af709e2d7f8882821e3a8649f)).

> This blogpost showcases some examples of usage of the geospatial API for the DuckDB backend. The material is inspired in the ["DuckDB: Spatial Relationships"](https://geog-414.gishub.org/book/duckdb/07_spatial_relationships.html) lesson from [Dr. Qiusheng Wu](https://geog-414.gishub.org/book/preface/instructor.html)'s course "Spatial Data Management" from the Department of Geography & Sustainability at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville.

Reviewer: Can you wrap all the long lines?

While it's easyish to review on GitHub, when someone else opens these in an editor they'll have to have soft wrap set.

While that might be fine, it's a bit more friendly to hard wrap.

Rendering will not change (only GitHub-flavored Markdown rendering is sensitive to wrapping).

::: {.callout-note}
You can check Dr. Qiusheng Wu's full Spatial Data Management course material in its  [website](https://geog-414.gishub.org/index.html), and the classes are also on [youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A4TOAdsXsEs&list=PLAxJ4-o7ZoPe9SkgnophygyLjTDBzIEbi),
:::

## Setup and Data

> At the moment, the geospatial features for the DuckDB backend are available on the main branch of Ibis, but they'll be included in the next release.

Reviewer: I don't think you need this disclaimer, we can release soon after this blog is published.

```{python}
from pathlib import Path
from zipfile import ZipFile
from urllib.request import urlretrieve

# Download and unzip
url = "https://open.gishub.org/data/duckdb/nyc_data.db.zip"
zip_path = Path("nyc_data.db.zip")
db_path = Path("nyc_data.db")

if not zip_path.exists():
    urlretrieve(url, zip_path)

if not db_path.exists():
    with ZipFile(zip_path) as zip_file:

>         zip_file.extract('nyc_data.db')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        zip_file.extract("nyc_data.db")
```

```

## Let's get started

> The beauty about spatial databases is that they not only allow us to store geometries in them, but also compare them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The beauty of spatial databases is that they allow us to both store *and* compute over geometries.
```

from ibis import _

ibis.options.interactive = True

con = ibis.duckdb.connect("nyc_data.db")
con.list_tables()
```

In this database we have multiple tables with information about New York City. Following, Dr. Qiusheng Wu's class, we'll take a look at some spatial relations.

We can start by taking a peak at the `nyc_subway_stations` table.

```{python}
subway_stations = con.table('nyc_subway_stations')
subway_stations
```

Notice that the last column has a `geometry` type, and in this case it contains a points that represent the location of each subway station. Let's take the entry for `'Broad St'`.

```{python}
broad_station =  subway_stations.filter(subway_stations.NAME == 'Broad St')
broad_station
```

### `geo_equals` (`ST_Equals`)

In DuckDB `ST_Equals` returns `True` if two geometries are topologically equal, meaning that they have the same dimension and they have identical coordinate values, although the order of the vertices may be different.

The following  is a bit redundant but we can check if our broad station point
matches only one point on our data using `geo_equals`

```{python}
subway_stations.filter(subway_stations.geom.geo_equals(broad_station.geom))
```

> We can also write this query without using `broad_station` as a variable, and with the help of the deferred expressions API, also known as Underscore (`_`) API (Learn more about it in the [chaining expressions docs](https://ibis-project.org/how-to/analytics/chain_expressions.html))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also write this query without using `broad_station` as a variable, and with the help of the deferred expressions API, also known as [the underscore API](https://ibis-project.org/how-to/analytics/chain_expressions.html).
```

No need to mention it three times (deferred, underscore and then link to the docs). We can link directly from the mention.

```{python}
subway_stations.filter(_.geom.geo_equals(_.filter(_.NAME == 'Broad St').geom))
```

### `intersect` (`ST_Intersect)

Let's find in which neighborhood is "Broad Street" subway station and determine its neighborhood using the the geospatial `intersect` function. The `intersect` function returns `True` if two geometries have any points in common.

The

```{python}

> boroughs = con.table('nyc_neighborhoods')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
boroughs = con.table("nyc_neighborhoods")
```

boroughs
```

### FIXME: NEED AN EXPLANATION ABOUT WHY
it's still unclear to me why:
a) this works broad_station.select(broad_station.geom).to_array())
b) but this doesn't broad_station.geom.to_array()).  -> AttributeError: 'GeoSpatialColumn' object has no attribute 'to_array'

Looks like a) is ibis.expr.types.relations.Table while b) ibis.expr.types.geospatial.GeoSpatialColumn
find a way to explain why we do this

```{python}
boroughs.filter(boroughs.geom.intersects(broad_station.select(broad_station.geom).to_array()))
```

### `d_within` (ST_DWithin)
We can also find what are the streets nearby (within 10 meters of) of the "Broad St" subway station using the `d_within` function. The `d_within` function returns True if the geometries are within a given distance.

```{python}
streets = con.table('nyc_streets')
streets
```

Using the deferred API, we can check which streets are within `d=10` meters of distance.

```{python}

> streets.filter(_.geom.d_within(broad_station.select(_.geom).to_array(), 10))

Reviewer: How difficult would it be to generate a map using leaflet or some other library that hooks in to the IPython display mechanism?

```

![broad_station_streets](broad_station_streets.png)

### `buffer` (ST_Buffer)

> We have a table in our database with information about homicides,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have a table in our database with information about homicides:
```

```{python}

> homicides = con.table('nyc_homicides')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
homicides = con.table("nyc_homicides")
```

homicides
```

> If we create a buffer around our "Broad St" station point, we can check if any of the homicides happen in that area. The `buffer` function computes a polygon or multipolygon that represents all points whose distance from a geometry is less than or equal to a given distance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's use the `buffer` method to find homicides near our `"Broad St"` station point.

The `buffer` method computes a polygon or multipolygon that represents all points whose distance from a geometry is less than or equal to a given distance.
```

> For example, in the case of our "Broad St" station point, if we create a buffer of 200 meters. We get a polygon which is approximately a circle of radius 200 meters around our point.
> ```{python}
> broad_station.geom.buffer(200)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, in the case of our "Broad St" station point, if we create a buffer of 200 meters. We get a polygon which is approximately a circle of radius 200 meters around our point.

```{python}
broad_station.geom.buffer(200)
```

```{python}
broad_station.geom.buffer(200).area()
```

To find if there were any homicides that happened in that area, we can find where the polygon resulting from adding the 200 meters buffer to our "Broad St" station point intersects with the geometry column in our homicides table.

```{python}
h_near_broad = homicides.filter(_.geom.intersects(broad_station.select(_.geom.buffer(200)).to_array()))
h_near_broad
```

It looks like there was one homicide that happened in a radius of 200 meters from the "Broad St" station, but from this data we can not tell in near which street happened. However, we can check if the homicide point is within a small distance of a street and get that information.

```{python}
streets.filter(_.geom.d_within(h_near_broad.select(_.geom).to_array(), 2))
```

## Functions supported and next steps

At the moment in Ibis we have support for around thirty geospatial functions for the DuckDB and we will ad some more (see list [here](https://gist.github.com/ncclementi/fbc5564af709e2d7f8882821e3a8649f)). We also support reads from multiple geospatial formats like `geojson`, via `read_geo()` (`ST_Read`).

> Interested in Ibis? check :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are some resources to learn more about Ibis:
```

- [Ibis Docs](https://ibis-project.org/)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- [Ibis GitHub](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis)

> Find us and ask questions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chat with us on Zulip:
```

---

> title: "Ibis Geospatial: Introducing DuckDB `spatial` support"

Author: This title could use some work but not sure what's a good title in this case.

```

We can also write this query without using `broad_station` as a variable, and with the help of the deferred expressions API, also known as Underscore (`_`) API (Learn more about it in the [chaining expressions docs](https://ibis-project.org/how-to/analytics/chain_expressions.html))

```{python}
subway_stations.filter(_.geom.geo_equals(_.filter(_.NAME == 'Broad St').geom))
```

### `intersect` (`ST_Intersect)

Let's find in which neighborhood is "Broad Street" subway station and determine its neighborhood using the the geospatial `intersect` function. The `intersect` function returns `True` if two geometries have any points in common.

The

```{python}
boroughs = con.table('nyc_neighborhoods')
boroughs
```

### FIXME: NEED AN EXPLANATION ABOUT WHY
it's still unclear to me why:
a) this works broad_station.select(broad_station.geom).to_array())
b) but this doesn't broad_station.geom.to_array()).  -> AttributeError: 'GeoSpatialColumn' object has no attribute 'to_array'

Looks like a) is ibis.expr.types.relations.Table while b) ibis.expr.types.geospatial.GeoSpatialColumn
find a way to explain why we do this

```{python}

> boroughs.filter(boroughs.geom.intersects(broad_station.select(broad_station.geom).to_array()))

Author: It's still not clear to me how to explain why we have to do this `broad_station.select(broad_station.geom).to_array())` for things to work and this `broad_station.geom.to_array())`  leads to `AttributeError: 'GeoSpatialColumn' object has no attribute 'to_array'` 

Looks like broad_station.select(broad_station.geom) is an `ibis.expr.types.relations.Table` while `broad_station.geom` is  `ibis.expr.types.geospatial.GeoSpatialColumn`

Any help doing this would be appreciated it.

Author: @cpcloud would you give me hand explaining the reasoning behind having to do  the `select` here?

Reviewer: Definitely.

`to_array()` is an to generate a scalar subquery from table with a single column (whose shape is scalar).

In SQL, the way this is done is by wrapping a `SELECT` statement in `()`:

```sql
SELECT x < (SELECT avg(x) FROM t)
FROM t
```

Which roughly corresponds to this Ibis code:

```python
t.select(_.x < t.agg(_.x.mean()).to_array())
```

`Column`s don't have this method because no one has implemented it, plus `to_array()` is a name from Ibis "Classic" that we should change because it no longer maps to any concepts in Ibis so we shouldn't add it to other things before renaming it to something else like `subq`/`subquery` etc.

---
title: "Ibis + DuckDB geospatial: a match made on Earth"
author: Naty Clementi
date: 2023-12-07
categories:
    - blog
    - duckdb
    - geospatial
---

Ibis now has support for [DuckDB geospatial functions](https://gist.github.com/ncclementi/fbc5564af709e2d7f8882821e3a8649f)!

This blogpost showcases some examples of the geospatial API for the DuckDB backend. The material is inspired in
the ["DuckDB: Spatial Relationships"](https://geog-414.gishub.org/book/duckdb/07_spatial_relationships.html) lesson from
[Dr. Qiusheng Wu](https://geog-414.gishub.org/book/preface/instructor.html)'s course "Spatial Data Management" from the
Department of Geography & Sustainability at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville.

::: {.callout-note}
You can check Dr. Qiusheng Wu's full Spatial Data Management course material on its
[website](https://geog-414.gishub.org/index.html), and the classes are also on
[YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A4TOAdsXsEs&list=PLAxJ4-o7ZoPe9SkgnophygyLjTDBzIEbi).
:::

## Data

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe a quick note here explaining what we're downloading.

Author: added something, let me know if that is good enough. I took the data from the lessons I was following but there was not a lot of detail about it there.

---
title: "Ibis + DuckDB geospatial: a match made on Earth"
author: Naty Clementi
date: 2023-12-07
categories:
    - blog
    - duckdb
    - geospatial
---

> Ibis now has support for some DuckDB geospatial functions (check the list [here](https://gist.github.com/ncclementi/fbc5564af709e2d7f8882821e3a8649f)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ibis now has support for [DuckDB geospatial functions](https://gist.github.com/ncclementi/fbc5564af709e2d7f8882821e3a8649f)!
```

> This blogpost showcases some examples of usage of the geospatial API for the DuckDB backend. The material is inspired in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This blogpost showcases some examples of the geospatial API for the DuckDB backend. The material is inspired in
```

::: {.callout-note}
You can check Dr. Qiusheng Wu's full Spatial Data Management course material on its
[website](https://geog-414.gishub.org/index.html), and the classes are also on
[YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A4TOAdsXsEs&list=PLAxJ4-o7ZoPe9SkgnophygyLjTDBzIEbi).
:::

## Data

```{python}
from pathlib import Path
from zipfile import ZipFile
from urllib.request import urlretrieve

# Download and unzip
url = "https://open.gishub.org/data/duckdb/nyc_data.db.zip"
zip_path = Path("nyc_data.db.zip")
db_path = Path("nyc_data.db")

if not zip_path.exists():
    urlretrieve(url, zip_path)

if not db_path.exists():
    with ZipFile(zip_path) as zip_file:
        zip_file.extract("nyc_data.db")
```

## Let's get started

The beauty of spatial databases is that they allow us to both store *and* compute over geometries.

```{python}
import ibis
from ibis import _

ibis.options.interactive = True

con = ibis.duckdb.connect("nyc_data.db")
con.list_tables()
```

We have multiple tables with information about New York City. Following Dr. Wu's class, we'll take a look at some
spatial relations.

We can start by taking a peak at the `nyc_subway_stations` table.

```{python}

> subway_stations = con.table('nyc_subway_stations')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subway_stations = con.table("nyc_subway_stations")
```

subway_stations
```

Notice that the last column has a `geometry` type, and in this case it contains points that represent the location of

> each subway station. Let's grab the entry for `'Broad St'`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
each subway station. Let's grab the entry for the Broad St subway station.
```

```{python}
broad_station = subway_stations.filter(subway_stations.NAME == "Broad St")
broad_station
```

### `geo_equals` (`ST_Equals`)

In DuckDB `ST_Equals` returns `True` if two geometries are topologically equal. This means that they have the same
dimension and identical coordinate values, although the order of the vertices may be different.

The following is a bit redundant but we can check if our `"Broad St"` point matches only one point in our data using
`geo_equals`

```{python}
subway_stations.filter(subway_stations.geom.geo_equals(broad_station.geom))
```

We can also write this query without using `broad_station` as a variable, and with the help of the deferred expressions

> API, also known as [the underscore API](https://ibis-project.org/how-to/analytics/chain_expressions.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
API, also known as [the underscore API](../../how-to/analytics/chain_expressions.qmd).
```

```{python}
subway_stations.filter(_.geom.geo_equals(_.filter(_.NAME == "Broad St").geom))
```

### `intersect` (ST_Intersect)

> Let's find in which neighborhood is "Broad Street" subway station and determine its neighborhood using the the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's locate the neighborhood of the "Broad Street" subway station using the
```

geospatial `intersect` function. The `intersect` function returns `True` if two geometries have any points in common.

```{python}
boroughs = con.table("nyc_neighborhoods")
boroughs
```

```{python}
boroughs.filter(boroughs.geom.intersects(broad_station.select(broad_station.geom).to_array()))
```

### `d_within` (ST_DWithin)

> We can also find what are the streets nearby (within 10 meters of) of the "Broad St" subway station using the `d_within`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also find the streets near (say, within 10 meters) the Broad St subway station using the `d_within`
```

function. The `d_within` function returns True if the geometries are within a given distance.

```{python}
streets = con.table("nyc_streets")
streets
```

Using the deferred API, we can check which streets are within `d=10` meters of distance.

```{python}

> sts_near_broad =streets.filter(_.geom.d_within(broad_station.select(_.geom).to_array(), 10))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sts_near_broad = streets.filter(_.geom.d_within(broad_station.select(_.geom).to_array(), 10))
```

sts_near_broad
```

::: {.callout-note}

> In the previous query, `streets` and `broad_station` are different tables. We use [`to_array()`](https://ibis-project.org/reference/expression-tables.html#ibis.expr.types.relations.Table.to_array) to generate a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the previous query, `streets` and `broad_station` are different tables. We use [`to_array()`](../../reference/expression-tables.qmd#ibis.expr.types.relations.Table.to_array) to generate a
```

We should refer to the local file and let quarto worry about generating the right HTML for it.

scalar subquery from a table with a single column (whose shape is scalar).
:::

> To visualize the findings, we will convert the tables to Geopandas dataframes. We need to do this because,
> at the moment, DuckDB geometries are not capable to store SRID information. By converting to
> Geopandas we can assign a `crs` and make some nice plots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To visualize the findings, we will convert the tables to Geopandas DataFrames.
```

I think this is required regardless of whether DuckDB supports storing SRID information.

```{python}
broad_station_gdf = broad_station.to_pandas()
broad_station_gdf.crs = "EPSG:26918"

sts_near_broad_gdf = sts_near_broad.to_pandas()
sts_near_broad_gdf.crs = "EPSG:26918"

streets_gdf = streets.to_pandas()
streets_gdf.crs = "EPSG:26918"
```

> ```{python}
> #visualize multiple layers
> import leafmap.deckgl as leafmap
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```{python}
import leafmap.deckgl as leafmap  # <1>
```

1. `leafmap.deckgl` allows us to visualize multiple layers
````

I think works a bit better as a Quarto [code annotation](https://quarto.org/docs/authoring/code-annotation.html).

Author: Nice, I didn't know about code annotations.

```{python}
m = leafmap.Map()

> m.add_vector(broad_station_gdf, get_fill_color='blue')
> m.add_vector(sts_near_broad_gdf,get_color='red', opacity=0.5)
> m.add_vector(streets_gdf, get_color='grey', zoom_to_layer=False, opacity=0.3)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
m.add_vector(broad_station_gdf, get_fill_color="blue")
m.add_vector(sts_near_broad_gdf, get_color="red", opacity=0.5)
m.add_vector(streets_gdf, get_color="grey", zoom_to_layer=False, opacity=0.3)
```

m
```

You can zoom in and out, and hover over the map to check on the streets names.

### `buffer` (ST_Buffer)

> We have a table in our database with information about homicides:

Reviewer: Perhaps a tiny bit of introduction here could help smooth the transition from subway stations to homicides.

Something along the lines of "next we'll look at homicide data to showcase additional functionality related to polygon handling"

```{python}
homicides = con.table("nyc_homicides")
homicides
```

Let's use the `buffer` method to find homicides near our `"Broad St"` station point.

The `buffer` method computes a polygon or multipolygon that represents all points whose distance from a geometry is less
than or equal to a given distance.

```{python}
broad_station.geom.buffer(200)
```

We can check the area using the `area` (`ST_Area`) function, and see that is $~ \pi r^{2}=125664$

```{python}
broad_station.geom.buffer(200).area()
```

> To find if there were any homicides that happened in that area, we can find where the polygon resulting from adding the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To find if there were any homicides in that area, we can find where the polygon resulting from adding the
```

200 meters buffer to our "Broad St" station point intersects with the geometry column in our homicides table.

```{python}
h_near_broad = homicides.filter(_.geom.intersects(broad_station.select(_.geom.buffer(200)).to_array()))
h_near_broad
```

> It looks like there was one homicide that happened in a radius of 200 meters from the "Broad St" station, but from this
> data we can not tell in near which street happened. However, we can check if the homicide point is within a small
> distance of a street and get that information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It looks like there was one homicide within 200 meters from the "Broad St" station, but from this
data we can't tell the street near which it happened. However, we can check if the homicide point is within a small
distance of a street.
```

```{python}
h_street = streets.filter(_.geom.d_within(h_near_broad.select(_.geom).to_array(), 2))
h_street
```

Let's plot this:

```{python}
broad_station_zone = broad_station.mutate(geom=broad_station.geom.buffer(200))
broad_station_zone = broad_station_zone.to_pandas()
broad_station_zone.crs = "EPSG:26918"

h_near_broad_gdf = h_near_broad.to_pandas()
h_near_broad_gdf.crs = "EPSG:26918"

h_street_gdf = h_street.to_pandas()
h_street_gdf.crs = "EPSG:26918"

mh = leafmap.Map()
mh.add_vector(broad_station_gdf, get_fill_color='orange')
mh.add_vector(broad_station_zone, get_fill_color='orange', opacity=0.1)
mh.add_vector(h_near_broad_gdf, get_fill_color='red', opacity=0.5)
mh.add_vector(h_street_gdf, get_color='blue', opacity=0.3)

> mh.add_vector(streets_gdf, get_color='grey', zoom_to_layer=False, opacity=0.2)

Reviewer: Can you double quote all the single quotes here?

mh
```

## Functions supported and next steps

At the moment in Ibis we have support for around thirty geospatial functions for the DuckDB and we will add some more
(see list [here](https://gist.github.com/ncclementi/fbc5564af709e2d7f8882821e3a8649f)).

> We also support reading multiple geospatial formats via [`read_geo()`](https://ibis-project.org/backends/duckdb.html#ibis.backends.duckdb.Backend.read_geo).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also support reading multiple geospatial formats via [`read_geo()`](../../backends/duckdb.qmd#ibis.backends.duckdb.Backend.read_geo).
```
